below focuses on the first trend and the emerging use of foundation models, whereas our empirical
study addresses all three.
2.1. Point forecasting with foundation models
Hornek et al. [17] compare six models (Chronos-Bolt, Chronos-T5, TimesFM, Moirai, Time-
MoE, and TimeGPT) in a point forecasting setup. The test period spans one year (2024) for each of
the five European day-ahead markets: Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, and the Netherlands.
Chronos-Bolt and Time-MoE are the strongest FMs, but none significantly outperforms MSTL,
a comparatively simple multiple-seasonal decomposition benchmark [25]. The authors conclude
that zero-shot forecasting is feasible, but pretraining alone does not guarantee superior accuracy.
More encouraging results are reported in a point forecasting study of the real-time Singapore
market, which operates with half-hourly load periods. Ponyuenyong et al. [21] combine Tiny
Time Mixers, Moirai, MOMENT, and TimesFM (zero-shot and fine-tuned versions) with a regu-
larization strategy designed to improve performance during price spikes. The foundation models
outperform the ARIMA, LSTM, and CNN-LSTM benchmarks by up to 37.4% in the Mean Ab-
solute Percentage Error (MAPE) over a test set comprising 10% of the 2021-2024 sample; note
that MAPE should actually be avoided in EPF [26, 27]. The authors argue that FMs may be
particularly useful when the price process is highly nonlinear and conventional models struggle to
accommodate extreme observations. However, the study considers generic benchmarks rather than
EPF-specific models such as those discussed in Sec. 5 and uses real-time market data. Therefore,
its conclusions may not be directly transferable to day-ahead markets.
Sayghe et al. [28] propose GridFM, a physics-informed foundation model for the joint point
forecasting of electricity load, locational marginal prices, carbon emissions, and renewable gener-
ation using 11 years of real-time data from the New York Independent System Operator (NYISO)
at five-minute resolution. The test set covers the final two years, 2023-2024, and the forecasting
horizons range from 1 to 24 hours. The model combines a foundation model with a frequency-
domain adaptation layer, graph-based representations of grid topology, physical constraints, mul-
titask learning, and explainability tools. The study focuses more broadly on real-time, multitask
power-system forecasting rather than specifically on EPF. Nevertheless, for the EPF task, it reports
a 15.9 to 23.2% reduction in MAPE relative to the baseline foundation models TimesFM, Chronos,
and Moirai-MoE. The study reports CRPS and coverage statistics in Sec. 5.9 but does not discuss
them in detail. As with [21], its conclusions may not be directly transferable to day-ahead markets.
2.2. Probabilistic forecasting with foundation models
Marchesi et al. [18] study Moirai in zero-shot and fine-tuned probabilistic forecasting settings.
Considering day-ahead data from four European bidding zones (Belgium, Germany, Spain, and
Sweden SE3) and test periods spanning a full year (1.10.2023 to 30.09.2024), they find that zero-
shot forecasts are promising, but generally less accurate in terms of the CRPS than those of the
DDNN benchmark; see Sec. 5 or [22]. Fine-tuning improves calibration, whereas the gains from
including exogenous variables are limited. The latter result points to one of the major weaknesses
of many FMs – if they were designed primarily for univariate forecasting, they may not fully
exploit the covariates. This is a serious limitation in EPF. At the time day-ahead bids are submitted,
market participants typically have access to forecasts of load and renewable generation. Ignoring
4